# Content-Security Policy hashes for Marko runtime scripts

## Intro

The `marko` package should export a `runtimeScriptHashes` string for developers to interpolate into the Content-Security Policy `script-src` directive. This would allow execution of Marko’s autogenerated inline `<script>`s via CSP’s hash mechanism.

## Motivation

Marko writes inline `<script>`s to HTML as part of its runtime. It also has a `$global.cspNonce` option to supply those `<script>s` with developer-provided nonces to allow them through CSP’s “nonce” mechanism.

However, CSP nonces have problems:

- Require dynamic HTML serving, so they can’t be used on static sites, fileservers, or anything Jamstack that kids these days like
- Cannot be cached at servers, intermediaries, or clients without some sort of worklet to regenerate `nonce`s (output transformers, CDN cloud workers, Service Workers, etc.)
- Less secure than hashes, as they don’t protect against malicious modification/variable injection inside nonced scripts

[(Initial discussion on the Marko Gitter)](https://gitter.im/marko-js/marko?at=5edd614189941d051a4c8a68)

## Guide-level explanation

> Explain the proposal as if it was already implemented and you are now teaching it to another Marko developer. That generally means:
> 
> - Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
> - What names and terminology work best for these concepts and why? Is it a continuation of existing Marko patterns, or a wholly new one?
> - Explaining how Marko developers should _think_ about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Marko. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
> - If applicable, describe the differences between teaching this to existing Marko developers and new Marko developers.

```marko
import { runtimeScriptHashes } from 'marko/csp'

<meta http-equiv="content-security-policy"
  content=`script-src 'self' … ${runtimeScriptHashes}`>
```

```js
import { runtimeScriptHashes } from 'marko/csp'

function someExpressMiddleware (req, res) {
  res.setHeader('content-security-policy', 
    `script-src 'self' … ${runtimeScriptHashes}`)
}
```

> For implementation-oriented proposals, this section should focus on how contributors should think about the change, and give examples of its concrete impact. For policy proposals, this section should provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact in concrete terms.

> Would the acceptance of this proposal mean the Marko docs must be re-organized or altered?

Luckily (or unfortunately, depending on how you look at it), Marko’s `cspNonce` option is already undocumented, so the documentation for this feature could explain both under a page for “Marko & Content-Security Policy”.

## Reference-level explanation

> This is the technical portion of the proposal. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:
> 
> - Its interaction with other features/tools is clear.
> - It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
> - Corner cases are dissected by example.
> - The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

- On-the-fly hashes for things like authored `<script>`s/`<style>`s containing dynamic values is possible, but out of scope for this proposal.

- Scripts should be hashed as statically as possible — ideally at Marko framework publish time. 

- Scripts should be hashed with SHA256, as it has the smallest payload size of CSP’s allowed hashing algorithms. This is especially important for HTTP headers, as they have no applicable compression that can be used on these hashes.

## Migration strategy

As a new feature, this shouldn’t need a migration strategy.

## Drawbacks

> Why should we *not* do this? Please consider the impact on teaching Marko,
on the integration of this feature with other existing and planned features,
on the impact of the API churn on existing apps, etc.

> There are tradeoffs to choosing any path, please attempt to identify them here.

## Alternatives

> What other designs have been considered? What is the impact of not doing this?

## Prior art
> Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal. A few examples of what this can include are:
> 
> - For language, runtime, taglib, tools, and compiler proposals: Does this feature exist in other languages or frameworks and what experience have their community had?
> - For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
> - For other teams: What lessons can we learn from what other communities have done here?

> This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other languages/frameworks/communities, provide readers of your proposal with a fuller picture. If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if it is an adaptation from somewhere else.

## Unresolved questions

> Optional, but suggested for first drafts. What parts of the design are still TBD?
